## About this document

The Department of Workforce Development (DWD) is seeking comments and
suggestions from interested parties on its draft Request for Proposals
(RFP) to modernize the information technology system it uses to
administer the Unemployment Insurance program for the State of
Wisconsin. DWD will use the comments and suggestions it receives in
response to this Request for Information (RFI) to finalize its RFP. This
RFI is issued solely for information and planning only and does not
constitute a solicitation. DWD will issue the finalized RFP in the near
future. Responses to this RFI are not an offer and cannot be accepted by
the State to form a binding contract. Proposals will not be considered
until the finalized RFP is released.

## How to respond

> Please fill out the attached [Google
> Form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSe1BqoRh6RyfgRl9-3cmK2aQh5mH0pcuG0dOcv66ncCu7V6_w/viewform)
> with short and concise answers to the following questions. Recognizing
> that responding will require some voluntary effort, DWD is hoping that
> interested parties respond completely and frankly to this RFI. DWD is
> interested in industry feedback to ensure it releases a comprehensive
> and easily understood RFP. DWD appreciates all relevant feedback, even
> if you are unable to review and respond to the entirety of the draft
> RFP.
>
> In the final section of the Google Form, please note the specific
> sections of the draft RFP where you have provided feedback, comments,
> or suggested changes.

Responses provided under this RFI will be available to requesters under
Wisconsin's public records law. Please refrain from including any
confidential or proprietary information that you do not want released to
the public in your response.

The Department will provide reasonable accommodations, including the
provision of informational material in an alternative format, for
qualified individuals with disabilities upon request.  Any interested
party in need of reasonable accommodations should contact the Purchasing
Agent, Kurtis Bock, at (608) 267-0533 or Kurtis.Bock@dwd.wisconsin.gov.

## Questions

-   What questions do you have about the scope or goals of the draft
    RFP?

-   What additional information about DWD's current systems would be
    useful in developing a proposal?

-   What might prevent your company from responding to this draft RFP?

-   What contract performance metrics would you include in this
    contract?

-   For the proposed strategy described in the draft RFP on encasement,
    what metrics would you recommend that DWD use to track project
    progress and successes over time to ensure DWD is moving toward its
    vision of a completely modernized system?

-   What obstacles do you see with DWD's proposed technical strategy?

-   Do you have experience using an agile and modular approach to
    updating a system?

    -   Describe the approach that you used.

    -   In your experience, what is the estimated time to complete an
        update to a system using such an approach?

-   Do you offer a COTS solution that would achieve the goals laid out
    in the draft RFP using an agile and modular approach?

    -   What is your usual approach to estimation on agile projects? Is
        the implementation process compatible with an iterative rollout?

    -   Would customization be required to fit the goals described in
        this draft RFP? How would you approach that customization?

    -   What is the pricing model, including licensing and ongoing
        support?

-   What skills or roles do you think would be especially important for
    the success of this project (including among your staff, any
    subcontractors, state staff, others)?

-   What size team would be most appropriate for this project (including
    your staff, subcontractors, state staff, other)?

-   What size team would be most appropriate for this project (including
    your staff, subcontractors, state staff, other)?

-   Tell us how you would work with partner staff? What key stakeholders
    would you need to work with? What partner support makes your
    projects successful?

-   How would you be able to support the working environment for this
    project? What access to production data would you need in order to
    be successful?

-   Would an on-site requirement have an on impact your bid?

-   What restrictions or concerns would you have if you had to work
    within and deploy your tools inside a state-provided virtual
    network?

-   How would you be able to support the working environment for this
    project? What access to production data would you need in order to
    be successful?

-   What risks to a successful modernization do you anticipate, should
    you pursue this work?

-   Are you interested in submitting a proposal to the finalized RFP or
    future procurements related to DWD's system modernization?

    -   If so, please provide your e-mail contact information.

    -   If not, please let us know what’s causing you to not have
        interest.

State of Wisconsin - Department of Workforce Development


Request for Proposals for Unemployment Insurance Modernization Team

IMPORTANT - This is a draft RFP is being provided by the State of
Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development (DWD) to seek comments and
suggestions from interested parties. DWD will use the comments and
suggestions it receives to finalize this draft RFP. This RFI is issued
solely for information and planning only and does not constitute a
solicitation. DWD will issue the finalized RFP in the near future.
Responses to this RFI are not an offer and cannot be accepted by the
State to form a binding contract. Proposals will not be considered until
the finalized RFP is released.

|     |
|-----|
|     |

#  Purpose, Background, and Problem

## 1.1 Purpose

The purpose of this Request for Proposals (RFP) is to seek a Contractor
or team of Contractors (hereinafter "Contractor" is used
interchangeably), who can provide the Department of Workforce
Development (DWD) with a technical strategy for modernizing its
unemployment insurance (UI) information technology system and then
deliver in accordance with that strategy. Additionally, this Contractor
will be responsible for effectively migrating DWD off DWD's existing
system without compromising its current functionality to end users,
using an encasement approach.

Modernizing DWD's legacy system may include a variety of solutions
(e.g., commercial off the shelf (COTS) systems, customized components,
etc.) that will provide DWD the flexibility and adaptability it needs to
support a dynamic policy environment (e.g., , new state or federal law,
guidance, or policy that modifies, creates, or terminates benefits
programs, changes charging to employers, or changes verification of
participants or other requirements). DWD's approach to modernization
will consist of several intersecting projects that may consist of
various components that may run separately or at times overlap.
Therefore, the Contractor will need to be flexible and agile in its
approach. DWD's overall goal is to use a modular approach so its system
can work in an ever-changing environment. For example, several federal
UI programs emerged rapidly during the COVID-19 pandemic. Through this
modernization project, DWD will be prepared to quickly implement program
and policy changes at any time, while also maintaining its existing
program applications without interruption or delay.

Ultimately, the work outlined below will seek to support the delivery of
DWD’s mission and vision for a future UI system:

*DWD customers (claimants and employers) can receive UI services
end-to-end without delay or frustration. DWD staff can administer
programs inclusively and efficiently, and do so with modern online
tools. DWD's technology is up to date and adaptable for new or changing
programs. Customers can easily get the support they need, how they need
it, through an automated system or direct interaction with DWD staff.  

*To achieve this product vision, DWD is seeking a Contractor who can
provide iterative software development services in two areas of focus —
(1) infrastructure and encasement of the existing systems and (2) modern
application development.

The results of this RFP may result in a single or multiple contract(s).
No proposal will be accepted that requires a minimum dollar amount or
guarantee a quantity of purchase.

## 1.2 Background

### About the Department of Workforce Development

DWD is a state agency charged with building and strengthening
Wisconsin's workforce in the 21st century and beyond. DWD’s overall
mission is to efficiently deliver effective and inclusive services to
meet Wisconsin's diverse workforce needs, and to advocate for the
protection and economic advancement of all Wisconsin workers, employers,
and job seekers.

### About the DWD Unemployment Insurance division

Under the direction of the DWD Secretary, Deputy Secretary, and
Assistant Deputy Secretary, the Unemployment Insurance (UI) division is
responsible for administering the unemployment insurance program (UI
program) in the State of Wisconsin on behalf of the Department. This
includes evaluating initial and weekly claims, paying timely and
accurate UI benefits to claimants, and collecting tax payments, as well
as wage and employment data, from employers.

The UI division is composed of [<u>five</u>
<u>bureaus</u>](https://dwd.wisconsin.gov/ui/division.htm) serving a
variety of business functions to serve claimants and employers under the
direction of the Division Administrator.

Relevant to this draft RFP, UI is further supported by the Division of
Operations (DO) Bureau of Information Technology Services (BITS). BITS
provides the technical support for the UI system environment in
partnership with the Department of Administration Division of Enterprise
Technology, which provides architecture, infrastructure, development,
security, and operational support.

Under normal circumstances, the UI program provides claimants with up to
26 weeks of benefits in a benefit year. In response to the pandemic, the
federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act),
as amended by the Continued Assistance Act and the American Rescue Plan
Act, altered UI benefits in terms of the number of weeks benefits are
available, the dollar amount of the benefit payment, and employer
charging of those benefits. This has been done through several different
[<u>programs</u>](https://dwd.wi.gov/uiben/caresact/progression/), a
number of which are active until September 2021: Pandemic Emergency
Unemployment Compensation (PEUC), Pandemic Unemployment Assistance
(PUA), Federal Pandemic Unemployment Compensation (FPUC), and Mixed
Earner Unemployment Compensation (MEUC), as well as through other
federal programs to ease the burden on employers.

Additionally, during the pandemic, there were a set of other programs
that were paid out, but that still require attention and work by the UI
division. These programs include Extended Benefits, Lost Wages
Assistance, and the first round of FPUC.

Likewise, the State of Wisconsin implemented law changes to address
unemployment needs during the pandemic. The Governor issued an emergency
order that was followed by DWD's emergency rules to temporarily ease
eligibility requirements for unemployment benefits. Further, 2019 Wis.
Act 185 and 2021 Wis. Act 4 provided charging relief for employers.
These law changes also required changes to the system in order to
implement them and work is still being done to complete the charging
relief.

As discussed in the next section, the inability to quickly adapt DWD's
computer programs to implement these federal and state law programs
caused delay in getting benefits to claimants and relief to employers.

## 1.3 Problem

The UI division uses multiple systems that are largely written in COBOL
and hosted on a mainframe to support programs for claimants and
employers. DWD provided a [<u>briefing on January 27,
2021</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ie34zURnTM) that walked
through its complicated and antiquated system. In this demonstration,
DWD explained how a relatively simple issue can slow down an
unemployment claim and require the UI division to take multiple steps to
resolve the issue. The use of multiple systems requires specialized and
advanced knowledge to use the respective systems and leads to a steep
learning curve when adding resources. These elements directly impact the
experience of the end users, which include claimants, employers, and DWD
staff. This has resulted in delays to the delivery of benefits and
frustration during the pandemic. Additionally, because much of the
system is still in COBOL, finding resources to code and support the
system can be challenging, which can further impact the timeline to
deliver new resources.

To accomplish its mission of administering the UI program in the state
of Wisconsin, DWD and the UI division rely on a number of technical
components that support its processes and workflows. DWD’s current
technical ecosystem is composed of several components:

-   A COBOL system, whose development started around 50 years ago, runs
    on a z14 mainframe that serves as the heart of the ecosystem. It
    includes a DB2 database that is the system of record for UI Benefits
    system data. Staff use CICS transactions screens for data entry.
    Authorization is controlled by native mainframe (RACF) security.

-   A DB2 schema that was ported from IDMS in 2011.

-   A set of batch jobs managed with JCL that run nightly validate and
    transform data. These jobs implement much of the business logic for
    handling claims such as applying rules to calculate benefits and
    transferring a flat file to a bank for payment processing.

-   Several .Net systems provide web-based interfaces for claimants and
    staff. These systems connect to Oracle databases as application
    stores and include:

    -   Claimant (public-facing web application) and Worker (staff web
        application) Portals, which are systems that share a similar
        code base and perform the following:

        -   connect directly to the mainframe DB2 instance via a custom
            ORM library

        -   call DB2 stored procedures

        -   consume SOAP web services provided as wrappers to CICS
            transactions on the mainframe

        -   perform batch processes for data and file transformation and
            transfer to other systems

    -   SUITES — UI tax system

    -   UIBNet — forms processing

-   Data connections to various Wisconsin and external systems that pull
    information needed for program administration via direct database
    connections or flat files.

-   Active Directory for IAM for non-mainframe systems.

Other components staff use as part of their work include:

-   A document management system (and fax OCR); and

-   Various business intelligence tools for data visualization and
    analysis that are tied into a separate data warehouse.

<img src="media/image1.png" style="width:6.5in;height:2.50429in" />

*Figure 1: General System Architecture*

This ecosystem has become difficult to maintain:

-   The mainframe system contains about 8.6 million lines of code. The
    codebase’s complexity, accrued over multiple eras, forces a
    developer to examine thousands of lines of code to make a bug-free
    change. Documentation exists but is limited. The relatively low
    level of documentation increases the time it takes to support and
    maintain the system or to ramp up new developers. The database
    contains about 5,000 tables and about 3.3 billion rows of data going
    back to the 1970s. The schema has few foreign key relationships and
    cryptic table and column names. The lack of relational structure is
    the result of a migration from IDMS. Some data is encoded to fit
    more data in a smaller space, left over from days of limited
    storage. SQL code within COBOL often uses cursors instead of
    select/update/insert/delete as a result of the migration from the
    set-based iterative nature of IDMS. The names, structure, encoding,
    calling pattern, and dependencies remaining from the IDMS migration
    make any database changes risky. The constellation of DWD systems
    that connect directly to the mainframe DB2 further complicates any
    DB2 database changes.

-   Batch processing failures can cause production issues. Program
    changes and updates require frequent changes to the batch processes
    where the program is implemented. It is difficult to properly test
    these batch processes before they run in production; testing is a
    manual process and may not expose issues with data conditions that
    only exist in production.

-   Batch processes have implicit interdependencies and assume the data
    is in the correct state for each segment of the workflow.

-   Inflexibility means many new processes and programs need to be
    implemented manually by staff. For example, some staff export data
    to Excel in order to run common calculations to be later entered
    into the system.

-   Because data is processed in the nightly jobs, it is not available
    in real time. Claims that need corrections are not identified until
    the day after they are submitted, adding extra steps for claimants
    and UI staff.

-   Access to mainframe data is restricted during batch processing
    windows to prevent data corruption.

-   Identifying fraud requires coordinated effort across teams,
    requiring manual work and constant monitoring.

As DWD begins to modernize its existing legacy systems, a new system
will need to be developed in parallel with maintaining existing systems
to reduce transition risks. COTS and/or SaaS products may be
incorporated in places, but DWD needs a development team to ensure
success because it will need to implement code for Wisconsin specific
business rules and configurations that adapts current data to a new
system.

## 1.4 Encasement strategy

To accomplish the mission and vision for a future UI system, DWD
proposes to use an encasement strategy (also known as the [<u>“strangler
fig”
pattern</u>](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/StranglerFigApplication.html))
with a goal to minimize risk to production systems while gradually
migrating to a modernized, easier to maintain system that is more
adaptive to UI program needs.

Using this strategy, an encasement Application Programming Interface
(API) will serve as a façade to hide the complexity of the existing DB2
data sources, provide services in support of existing and novel UI
systems, and allow for transition between separate functional
implementations. DWD will be able to replace implementation of different
functionalities behind the API as needs and technology evolve over time.
The API can mitigate risks during functional transition by comparing
results between the existing and new systems. The API is key to a
modular, emergent architecture.

Under this strategy, delivering in the modernized system generally
includes:

-   Developing sufficient understanding and documentation of the data
    flows, code execution flows, policy and business processes related
    to a particular desired outcome — this understanding informs the
    transition strategy and helps to build a prioritized work inventory
    for design and development to include:

    -   Documenting the mainframe-based UI COBOL software code and logic
        at a high level, understanding how the various components
        operate and interact including how and when the data is
        represented and modified during business processes,

    -   Documenting the external systems dependencies and
        responsibilities, understanding how they interact, when, and
        why, and

    -   Documenting the policy rules that govern the system and the
        claims process, identifying the legal requirements for
        operation.

-   Determining the data exchange and/or interactions with the existing
    mainframe-based data sources such as DB2, file transfers, and web
    services calls needed to produce the desired outcome in the new
    system.

-   Implementing and validating the desired outcome including data
    representation and transfer in the new system.

-   Transitioning the functionalities from the mainframe-based and other
    legacy UI systems to the new system when the UI division decides a
    feature/function is ready to be made available for users— both
    systems will run concurrently for a while but only one will be the
    system of record at any given time for any particular functionality.

The *initial* implementation steps of this strategy involve:

-   Defining a data model for UI data related to some user-facing
    feature because the overall goal for this work is to deliver value
    to end-users.

-   Supporting the user-facing feature and downstream processes while
    continuing to support federal reporting requirements and functions
    (e.g., Benefit Accuracy Measurement (BAM); Benefits Timeliness and
    Quality (BTQ); data validation, etc.).

-   Building an extraction layer to pull data from DB2, transform it
    into the updated data model, and providing it via an API for
    consumption by other applications for the desired user-facing
    feature. This API will be the core component between the mainframe
    system and its current dependencies to allow for migration to a
    modernized application.

-   Using the transformed data to provide the user-facing feature in an
    existing or new interface.

Additional iterations can build on this foundation and repeat the
process to migrate additional outcomes from the mainframe to the
modernized application.

#  Scope

## 2.1 Product vision

For this modernization work, DWD has defined an ambitious future state:

> DWD customers (claimants and employers) can receive UI services
> end-to-end without delay or frustration. DWD staff can administer
> programs inclusively and efficiently, and do so with modern online
> tools. DWD's technology is up to date and adaptable for new or
> changing programs. Customers can easily get the support they need, how
> they need it, through an automated system or direct interaction with
> DWD staff.

The Contractor who implement applications to support this vision should
address the following intended outcomes. These are described in more
detail in the objectives section:

**Program Delivery**

-   UI program delivery, claim processing, and benefit payments are
    seamless and delivered without delay

-   DWD is ready for any future unanticipated and drastic increases in
    unemployment and existing staff can easily handle increased program
    and system demands

-   UI is able to quickly implement new programs in order to pay
    benefits promptly and accurately when due

-   The UI program is viewed as the gold standard across the country
    because service delivery is timely and accurate for all customers

**DWD Staff**

-   DWD staff can be easily trained to do the job, significantly
    reducing the amount of time it takes to understand how to enter
    information into the system

-   DWD staff are free to spend their time performing more impactful
    work than manually adjusting 100-250k claims each year

-   DWD staff find that using the system is intuitive from the
    staff-person perspective

**System**

-   System has a consistent look and feel across benefits, tax, and
    appeals systems for claimants, employers, and state employees

-   The mainframe is retired and DWD puts technology to use to serve
    Wisconsin residents

<!-- -->

-   Fraudulent claims are more easily identified and dealt with
    appropriately

-   System allows for secure and efficient querying of data

**End Users**

-   Employers can correctly classify their employees to ensure they get
    the UI benefits they are entitled to

-   Claimants may easily navigate the system and have their claims
    accurately and timely processed

## 2.2 Expectations

**To achieve this product vision, DWD is seeking a Contractor that can
provide iterative software development services in two focus areas — (1)
infrastructure and encasement of the existing systems and (2) modern
application development.**

This software development project will use agile development principles,
with robust documentation, human-centered design, and an extensible
infrastructure. Due to the frequency of policy changes, DWD prefers
products that can be easily updated, especially by non-technical users.
Additionally, DWD staff must be able to alter the codebases. DWD expects
that the development process will be collaborative and iterative, with
open, regular, and frequent communication between DWD and the
Contractor. Throughout the period of performance, the Contractor should
expect to work with various DWD staff in order to carry out the
objectives.

DWD will identify an empowered Product Owner and Technical Lead to lead
this project on behalf of DWD. The Product Owner and Technical Lead will
work with DWD leadership, including the Executive Sponsor and Project
leads, to set the overall direction of the project, prioritize and drive
decision-making, update a long-term product roadmap, consider and
address the business needs of DWD, and support the other members of the
development team. The Contractor will engage with DWD on the
delivery-focused side of product management and team facilitation.

At the start of this project, the Product Owner and Technical Lead will
work with teams, as proposed by the Contractor, to enable delivery of
the product vision and intended outcomes listed above in the following
two areas:

1.  **infrastructure and encasement** with a specific focus on data
    extraction, API development, and system documentation, and

2.  **application development** with a specific focus on user research,
    new feature development, and policy documentation.

The goal of this structure is to create focus within areas while still
allowing complementary, collaborative work across the modernization
effort. While initially different in focus, these two focus areas will
necessarily overlap at points of implementation.

DWD intends to deploy software as soon as it has been sufficiently
developed to provide the minimal viable functionality, as defined by
DWD. This is subject to change. DWD expects that regular, and frequent
releases will follow the Minimum Viable Product (MVP). As new areas for
developing additional functionality emerge, the team will continue to
iteratively and incrementally expand work products and releases, with a
sprint cycle that is mutually agreed upon.[1] The software development
and release process will be mutually agreed upon, with the goal of
reaching a more mature DevSecOps[2] practice, such as the 12-factor app
methodology.

DWD will be responsible for the hosting of the deployed product, as well
as obtaining any necessary compliance authorizations. DWD will determine
which security controls are required and whether they have been
satisfied. DWD expects to provide those security controls to the
Contractor as either acceptance criteria or separate user stories. The
Contractor is expected to use best practices for security and compliance
in writing, testing, and delivering code.

Currently, DWD has in-house proficiency with .NET programming languages.
While there is a preference for a Contractor that would be able to
continue use these languages, DWD is open to proposals that use other
modern programming languages.

DWD will own the source code and all other artifacts developed under the
contract resulting from this RFP (the "Contract"). The Contractor will
provide recommendations to DWD for any software components or any other
licensed products needed to develop the application. DWD will be
responsible for procuring the selected software components or other
licensed products. The Contractor must post to a source code management
repository designated by DWD.

## 2.3 Anticipated period of performance and team structure

**The initial period of performance (POP) for the contract is 12
months.** **There will also be three optional renewal periods (renewals)
of 12 months, for a total period of performance of 36 months.** The POP
will begin on the date of the contract kickoff meeting.

For this project, DWD anticipates two teams of 5-7 Full Time Employees
(FTE) each (10-14 FTE total), with a combination of product, research,
design, and engineering roles. However, Contractors are encouraged to
propose different team structures if it meets their technical and
staffing plans. For additional information about mandatory roles, see
the “Staffing plan” section of “Instructions for proposals.” The annual
cost for these teams cannot exceed $4 million, annually.

The Contractor may choose the location(s) from which to perform the
required software development services. While DWD is open to supporting
distributed teams, there are obstacles to providing remote access to
existing code and systems. The Contractor should be prepared to work
with DWD to create a successful distributed working environment. DWD’s
core working hours are 9 AM CDT to 5 PM Central Time, Monday through
Friday.

DWD intends to award a time and material (T&M) type contract. All T&M
rates shall be fully burdened and fixed at the time of award. The
offeror must specify whether the fixed hourly rate for each labor
category applies to labor performed by (1) the offeror; (2)
subcontractors; and/or (3) divisions, subsidiaries, or affiliates or the
offeror under a common control.

#  Objectives

## 3.1 Work Inventory

The set of **preliminary** epics, current state and user stories are set
forth below and in more depth in Appendix A. These will be the starting
point for the software development performed. These preliminary user
stories are provided only for illustrative purposes and do not comprise
the full scope or detail of the project.

DWD expects that the Contractor will work closely with the Product Owner
to perform regular user research and usability testing and to develop
and prioritize a full gamut of user stories as the project progresses.

Note: Individual user stories may be modified, added, retracted, or
reprioritized by DWD at any time. DWD expects that the user stories will
be continuously refined during the development process in collaboration
with the Contractor’s team.

***Initial areas of focus for Year 1 Contractor. These are listed in
order of priority, but do not imply a linear sequence. These can be
worked on in parallel:***

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 34%" />
<col style="width: 46%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Priority level</th>
<th>Area of Focus</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>0</strong></td>
<td><strong>Understand current state of system, unemployment insurance policy and the result of past DWD modernization efforts</strong></td>
<td>By working closely with DWD staff and consuming in-depth documentation, the Contractor will need to get quickly up to speed on the current state of DWD's system to support a transition to a modern system. This will require migration of legacy data and encapsulating the legacy system without compromising current functionality and adherence to legal requirements, as determined by DWD.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>1</strong></td>
<td><p><strong>Assess current state and begin to modernize manual workflows in Adjustments and Special Programs (ASP)<br />
</strong>To shift away from manual (non-automated) processing of claimant benefits, determine the cause of mainframe “Rejects” that create manual work for ASP staff. These also are the cause of many delays to claimants receiving benefits.</p>
<p>Reduce the delay of payments to claimants by automating some manual workflows in ASP. Decreasing the time spent on manual workarounds will allow ASP staff to refocus their time and attention on more impactful work, reduce ramp-up time for new staff, and decrease the burden of work management by senior ASP staff.</p></td>
<td><p>Currently, ASP staff must process an enormous volume of manual cases (250k last in 2020) to do something to the claim the system cannot perform. Outlier cases, changes to rules, and new programs are challenging to implement and require manual fixes. These rules are hardcoded and need to be adaptable to new programs.</p>
<p><em>Example User Story (future state):<br />
“</em>As a staff person in ASP, my claims work is more automated. Manual claims are lower in volume and "system audits" are less necessary so that my time would otherwise be spent on more impactful work (troubleshooting rare exceptions) and claimants can receive their benefits faster”</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>2</strong></td>
<td><strong>Begin to encase a legacy system, by building an API layer</strong> Start by building an API layer for encasement. With these tools DWD can complete a controlled, low-risk, and iterative transition from the existing system. Further description of APIs can be found <a href="https://18f.gsa.gov/2016/04/22/what-is-an-api/"><u>here.</u></a></td>
<td><p>Specifically: Leverage DWD staff knowledge and documentation to draft enough of a data schema to begin building a bridge API.</p>
<p>Build an encasement layer to transform data from the cryptic old format to a clean new format.</p>
<p>Build another encasement layer for the API using lower-risk read-only connections to DB2 until the mainframe is further documented.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>3a</strong></td>
<td><p><strong>Design and develop a modern front-end interface for a specific area of functionality, identified with DWD staff</strong> Design and deliver this functionality through user-centered design methods and agile software development. New functionality should deliver value to end users quickly and should be data-driven.</p>
<p>Additionally, explore smaller, strategic, user experience changes to existing interfaces for quick, high-value wins with impact for users.</p>
<p>Following initial design, test with end-users and receive early feedback. Use this feedback to help DWD identify development priorities and validate new application functionality early on in this modernization approach.</p></td>
<td><p>Working with DWD Product Owner and Technical Lead, determine a specific end-to-end (from the user interface to the data layer) slice of functionality ASP needs. Leverage existing user research and collaborate with the encasement team to implement.</p>
<p>A working hypothesis for this area is to select a starting point that will be insulated from too many external dependencies such as cross-matching, data sharing, and banking integrations.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>3b</strong></td>
<td><p><strong>Develop new data model to support emergent functionality</strong></p>
<p>Initially the development team should begin to construct a new data model that supports the area of functionality identified in Area #3. This work will expand into additional areas of the database structure as new functionality is identified for modernization.</p>
<p>Map the new data model to the existing data structure to reconcile these data models.</p></td>
<td><p>Existing data is not in a relational structure and is not sufficiently documented. The data structure requires special knowledge to understand; and no single person possesses all this knowledge.</p>
<p>Eventually, the data model will need to support user-facing features and downstream processes as well. It should allow for the relationships of the claim through all of its possible stages and track changes to the claim over time. It will also need to be able to track data specific to special programs. It will also need to support federal reporting and other legally-required functions.</p>
<p><em>Example User Story (future state):<br />
</em>“As an application development team member, I need to be able to change logic and introduce new logic quickly (and without impacting other areas of the application) so that DWD can deliver new services to claimants and employers within a reasonable (and legally required) timeframe”</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>4</strong></td>
<td><strong>Allow for easy querying of the database</strong></td>
<td><p>Meet data querying needs of integrated applications, business intelligence, and reporting.</p>
<p><em>Example User Story (future state):<br />
</em>“As a business analyst, I need to test with live data in regression testing to have confidence in the changes”</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>5</strong></td>
<td><strong>Support ongoing efforts to modernize software development practices within BITs/DWD (automated testing, Continuous integration [CI]/continuous delivery [CD], agile, user-centered design)</strong></td>
<td><p>Put customer experience at the center of all development efforts to deliver value more quickly to end users. Improve time to delivery with an end-to-end path to production through continuous deployment and integration of code. Use automated testing to relieve manual processes conducted by staff and decrease production risks.</p>
<p><em>Example User Stories (future state):</em></p>
<p>“As a developer, I need to understand how the source data represents UI program needs so that I can build an automated method to verify if an alternate system with a different implementation is delivering an accurate outcome”</p>
<p>“As a developer, I need automated testing within my CI/CD pipeline so that I can quickly update the system with bug fixes”</p>
<p>“As a developer, I need documentation about the system and the responsibilities of its components so that I can get up to speed quickly with unfamiliar components”</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## 3.2 Oversight Metrics

DWD will use the following oversight metrics to monitor the quality of
Contractor’s performance and deliverables throughout the Contract. These
metrics provide DWD with a proactive way to avoid unacceptable or
deficient performance and provide the basis for addressing such issues.

Because there are many acceptable approaches to this Contract’s
objectives, these metrics provide high-level performance standards and
describe their purpose. As part of the contract kick-off process, the
Contractor will work with DWD to create a detailed set of performance
standards and accompanying methods of assessment, including the tools to
support this oversight. Acceptance Criteria, located in Appendix B,
shall serve as the default and starting point for creating these
performance standards and accompanying assessment methods.

These metrics are:

-   Work meets defined acceptance criteria, described within a work
    inventory

-   Code is tested

-   Code is properly styled and well-structured

-   Product is accessible for all users

-   Deployment is simple

-   Code and development processes are documented

-   Product is secure

-   Meets the standards in Appendix B, Acceptance Criteria

-   User research informs software development

-   Code and artifacts are available to DWD

The Product Owner will perform the assessments, though they may choose
to delegate tasks to another DWD staff member where that other staff
member has relevant subject matter expertise. It is expected that
assessment intervals will begin with a more frequent pace and can be
gradually lengthened as the Contractor and DWD build a collaborative
relationship.

The performance standards and methods of assessment may be updated at
the discretion of DWD. Updates to these overarching procedures may be
made by modification to the contract.

#  Instructions and Evaluation

## 4.1 Instructions for Proposals

The proposal consists of three sections:

-   A development proposal, including a technical submission and
    staffing approach

-   Answers to case studies

-   A pricing sheet

### Development proposal

The development proposal must consist of:

-   A technical proposal of no more than 4 pages using 12-point type,

-   A staffing plan of no more than 3 pages using 12-point type,

-   Staff resumes, and

-   Signed letters of intent for those Mandatory Personnel not currently
    employed by the Contractor

The development proposal may also include, as appendices, user research
plans and design artifacts of no more than 30 single-spaced pages
combined. The submission must use 12-point type.

### Technical proposal

This technical submission must:

-   Set forth the Contractor's proposed approach to providing the
    services required, including the base software (if any) and
    programming language(s) that the Offeror proposes to use.

-   Make clear that the Offeror understands the details of the project
    requirements.

-   Identify potential obstacles to efficient development and include
    plans to overcome those potential obstacles.

-   Include a description of the Offeror’s plans, if any, to provide
    services through a joint venture, teaming partner, or
    subcontractors.

-   Include references to one or more source code samples, preferably
    open source.

-   Refer to prior experience, both narratively and through links to
    source code and deliverables, if possible.

References to source code samples must be either links to Git
repositories (either credentialed or public) or to equivalent
version-controlled repositories that provide DWD with the full revision
history for all files. If an Offeror submits a link to a private Git
repository hosted with GitHub, DWD will provide the Offeror with one or
more GitHub user identities by email, and the Offeror will be expected
to promptly provide the identified user(s) with access to the private
Git repository.

The source code samples should be for projects that are similar in size,
scope, and complexity to the project contemplated here. The source code
must have been developed by either (i) the Offeror itself, (ii) a
teaming partner that is proposed in response to this RFP, or (iii) an
individual that is being proposed as Mandatory Personnel (see "Staffing
Plan" section below) for this project. DWD would prefer that the source
code samples have been for recent projects involving teams with similar
personnel to the staffing proposed in the staffing plan.

If the references to source code samples provided do not include
associated references to user research plans and design artifacts
demonstrating how ongoing user research was incorporated into the
project, then the Offeror must submit a user research plan and design
artifacts relating to at least one (1) of the source code samples
provided.

### Staffing plan

The staffing plan must set forth the Offeror’s proposed approach to
staffing the requirements of this project, including the titles of each
of the labor categories proposed and proposed level of effort for each
member of the Offeror’s development team.

The staffing plan must also identify the proposed Project Manager and
proposed Technical Lead by name and include a resume for each. These
roles are designated as Mandatory Personnel for this project. The
Project Manager will be a direct liaison to DWD product team and will be
responsible for the supervision and management of all of the
Contractor’s personnel assigned to this project. The Technical Lead must
have a full understanding of the technical approach to be used by the
Contractor’s development team and will be responsible for ensuring that
the Contractor’s development team follows that approach.

Resumes for Mandatory Personnel must include a brief description of the
experience and capability for each individual but cannot exceed one (1)
page in length each. Offerors proposing Mandatory Personnel who are not
currently employed by the Offeror or a teaming partner must include a
signed letter of intent from the individual proposed as Mandatory
Personnel that he/she intends to participate in this project for at
least one (1) year.

The staffing plan must set forth and explain the extent to which the
Offeror will provide individuals with experience in at least each of the
following areas:

-   Agile development practices

-   Application Protocol Interface (API) development and documentation

-   Automated (unit/integration/end-to-end) testing

-   Building and testing public facing sites and tools

-   Content design and copywriting

-   Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment

-   Cloud deployment

-   Data modeling and data architecture

-   Data migration, especially for legacy systems

-   Refactoring to minimize technical debt

-   Open-source software development

-   Open-source login/authentication services

-   Product management and strategy

-   Sketching, wireframing, and/or prototyping, and user-task flow
    development

-   Usability research, such as (but not limited to) contextual inquiry,
    stakeholder interviews, and usability testing

-   User experience design

-   Visual design

The staffing plan must also set forth the extent to which the proposed
team for this project was involved in the development of any source code
provided with the technical submission.

### Case studies

For each case study, the Offeror must detail how it would respond to the
situation described in the prompt. While Offerors are encouraged to
refer to prior experience, it is most useful to understand the approach
for a future situation. Responses are limited to one page maximum per
case study, four pages using 12-point type all together. Note:
Information submitted to DWD may be subject to release under the state's
public records law.

#### Case study 1

Many requirements for this system come from Wisconsin and federal law
and policy. Explain how you would:

-   Translate law and policy rules into business logic within the
    application

-   Design a system that can respond quickly to external policy changes

#### Case study 2

Authentication and authorization is a key component of this type of
system. DWD will have choices between internal authentication systems
and various COTS tools. Explain how you would:

-   Assess the level of difficulty and work needed to integrate
    authentication services into the product

-   Select the right fit for the product’s needs

-   Implement and test an authentication service

#### Case study 3

As part of an encasement approach, APIs serve as connectors between
loosely coupled components. Explain how you would:

-   Design an API to allow components to be loosely coupled

-   Scale an API from providing the minimum pieces of data to one
    component up to providing a full data model to multiple components

#### Case study 4

In migrating from a legacy system to a more modern system, DWD will also
be updating its practices and processes to support such a system.
Explain how you would:

-   Create and maintain technical standards for modern software
    development

-   Collaborate with DWD to build alignment with those standards and
    capacity for long-term ownership of this system

#### Case study 5

While developing this system, there will be many architectural decisions
to make. Explain how you would:

-   Determine the right time to make an architectural decision

-   Document decisions for both internal consistency and stakeholder
    awareness

### Price Submissions

Price submissions must set forth a single dollar amount that represents
the Offeror’s estimate of the total cost to DWD for the development
services and travel expenses required for the period of performance,
broken down by the initial contract period and each renewal. Travel
costs will be limited to reimbursement cost as defined by the State. DWD
expects that the labor categories and staffing levels set forth by the
Contractor in the Excel workbook (or convertible) will be consistent
with the Offeror’s staffing plan.

The Contractor will be compensated at loaded hourly rates. DWD intends
to evaluate proposals and award based on initial proposals, and
therefore the Offeror’s initial proposal should contain the Offeror’s
best terms.

### Interviews

The Offerors with the most highly rated written submissions will each be
invited to participate in an interview as part of the evaluation
process. Each interview will be conducted remotely via video connection
and/or teleconference. DWD will communicate with certain Offerors to
schedule the dates and times of interviews.

Each interview will include an unstructured question and answer session,
during which Offerors will be asked questions about the technical
aspects of their proposal and their approach to software development.
DWD expects these interviews will assist DWD to assess the technical
abilities of the proposed development team and to better understand the
proposed technical approach described in the Offeror’s written
submission. Both of the Offeror’s proposed Mandatory Personnel must
participate in the interview.

The Introductions phase of each interview will last approximately 5
minutes, during which the Offeror and DWD interview team members will
introduce themselves.

The Open Technical Session of each interview will last approximately 45
minutes, during which the Offeror interview team will respond to DWD’s
questions related to the technical aspects of the Offeror’s proposal.
Offerors will NOT be able to use or present any slides, graphs, charts,
or other written presentation materials, including handouts. There will
be no follow-up session for further questions after this part of the
interview.

The Closing Remarks phase of each interview will last approximately 5
minutes, during which the Offeror may make a short presentation
summarizing the Offeror’s responses to DWD’s questions.

Interviews will not constitute discussions. Statements made during an
interview will not become part of the agreement.

## 4.2 Basis of Award and Evaluation Factors

Each submission received by DWD will be evaluated for technical
acceptability. Submissions that are determined to not be technically
acceptable may be not be evaluated further. At DWD's discretion the
Offeror may be provided an opportunity to make clarifications.

Proposals must be realistic with respect to technical approach, staffing
approach, and total price. Proposals that indicate a lack of
understanding of the project requirements may not be considered for
award. Proposals may indicate a lack of understanding of the project
requirements if the staffing plan does not use a realistic mix of labor
categories and hours, or if any proposed hourly labor rates are
unrealistically high or low.

DWD will evaluate proposals that are technically acceptable on a
competitive best value basis using scoring that weights each of the
technical evaluation factors and price factors according to relative
importance. Technically acceptable submissions will be evaluated based
on four (4) evaluation factors. These factors are:

-   Technical approach

-   Staffing approach

-   Responses to case studies

-   Price

Proposals from minority-owned business enterprises and disabled
veteran-owned business enterprises certified by the Wisconsin Department
of Administration may be weighted by a factor of 1.00 to 1.05 to provide
up to a five percent (5%) preference to these businesses. For more
information, see Wis. Stat. § 16.75(3m).

DWD has not yet finalized the weight or scoring that it will assign to
each of the evaluation factors. Details on how DWD plans to score
proposals will be provided in the final RFP.

### Technical Approach

In evaluating an Offeror’s technical approach, DWD will consider (a) the
quality of the Offeror’s plans to provide the open source, agile
development services required, including user research and design, (b)
the extent of the Offeror’s understanding of the details of the project
requirements, and (c) the extent to which the Offeror has identified
potential obstacles to efficient development, and has proposed realistic
approaches to overcome those potential obstacles.

### Staffing Approach

In evaluating an Offeror’s staffing approach, DWD will consider (a) the
skills and experience of the Mandatory Personnel and other individuals
that the Offeror plans to use to provide the required services, (b) the
mix of labor categories that will comprise the Offeror’s proposed
development team, and (c) the Offeror’s proposed number of hours of
services to be provided by each member of the Offeror’s proposed
development team.

### Case studies

In evaluating an Offeror’s case studies, DWD will consider (a) the
quality of Offeror’s responses to needs identified in the prompts, (b)
the completeness of the Offeror’s responses to the prompts, and (c) the
compatibility of the responses with the technical approach proposed by
the Offeror.

### Price

In evaluating an Offeror’s price, DWD will consider the total of the
Offeror’s estimated costs for the development services and travel
expenses proposed, for the full period of performance. This total amount
will be provided in the Excel workbook. All pricing will remain
unchanged for the first 90 days of any resulting contract. Any requests
for changes will be supported by evidence, such as an industry-wide
market increase.

5.  # Standard and Supplemental Terms and Conditions

    1.  ## Standard Terms and Conditions (DOA-3054)

**1.0 SPECIFICATIONS**: The specifications in this request are the
minimum acceptable. When specific manufacturer and model numbers are
used, they are to establish a design, type of construction, quality,
functional capability and/or performance level desired. When alternates
are bid/proposed, they must be identified by manufacturer, stock number,
and such other information necessary to establish equivalency. The State
of Wisconsin shall be the sole judge of equivalency. Bidders/proposers
are cautioned to avoid bidding alternates to the specifications which
may result in rejection of their bid/proposal.

**2.0 DEVIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS**: Deviations and exceptions from
original text, terms, conditions, or specifications shall be described
fully, on the bidder's/proposer's letterhead, signed, and attached to
the request. In the absence of such statement, the bid/proposal shall be
accepted as in strict compliance with all terms, conditions, and
specifications and the bidders/proposers shall be held liable.

**3.0 QUALITY**: Unless otherwise indicated in the request, all material
shall be first quality. Items which are used, demonstrators, obsolete,
seconds, or which have been discontinued are unacceptable without prior
written approval by the State of Wisconsin.

**4.0 QUANTITIES**: The quantities shown on this request are based on
estimated needs. The state reserves the right to increase or decrease
quantities to meet actual needs.

**5.0 DELIVERY**: Deliveries shall be F.O.B. destination freight prepaid
and included unless otherwise specified.

**6.0 PRICING AND DISCOUNT**: The State of Wisconsin qualifies for
governmental discounts and its educational institutions also qualify for
educational discounts. Unit prices shall reflect these discounts.

**6.1** Unit prices shown on the bid/proposal or contract shall be the
price per unit of sale (e.g., gal., cs., doz., ea.) as stated on the
request or contract. For any given item, the quantity multiplied by the
unit price shall establish the extended price, the unit price shall
govern in the bid/proposal evaluation and contract administration.

**6.2** Prices established in continuing agreements and term contracts
may be lowered due to general market conditions, but prices shall not be
subject to increase for ninety (90) calendar days from the date of
award. Any increase proposed shall be submitted to the contracting
agency thirty (30) calendar days before the proposed effective date of
the price increase, and shall be limited to fully documented cost
increases to the contractor which are demonstrated to be industrywide.
The conditions under which price increases may be granted shall be
expressed in bid/proposal documents and contracts or agreements.

**6.3** In determination of award, discounts for early payment will only
be considered when all other conditions are equal and when payment terms
allow at least fifteen (15) days, providing the discount terms are
deemed favorable. All payment terms must allow the option of net thirty
(30).

**7.0 UNFAIR SALES ACT**: Prices quoted to the State of Wisconsin are
not governed by the Unfair Sales Act.

**8.0 ACCEPTANCE-REJECTION**: The State of Wisconsin reserves the right
to accept or reject any or all bids/proposals, to waive any technicality
in any bid/proposal submitted, and to accept any part of a bid/proposal
as deemed to be in the best interests of the State of Wisconsin.

Bids/proposals MUST be date and time stamped by the soliciting
purchasing office on or before the date and time that the bid/proposal
is due. Bids/proposals date and time stamped in another office will be
rejected. Receipt of a bid/proposal by the mail system does not
constitute receipt of a bid/proposal by the purchasing office.

**9.0 METHOD OF AWARD**: Award shall be made to the lowest responsible,
responsive bidder unless otherwise specified.

**10.0 ORDERING**: Purchase orders or releases via purchasing cards
shall be placed directly to the Contractor by an authorized agency. No
other purchase orders are authorized.

**11.0 PAYMENT TERMS AND INVOICING**: The State of Wisconsin normally
will pay properly submitted Contractor invoices within thirty (30) days
of receipt providing goods and/or services have been delivered,
installed (if required), and accepted as specified.

Invoices presented for payment must be submitted in accordance with
instructions contained on the purchase order including reference to
purchase order number and submittal to the correct address for
processing.

A good faith dispute creates an exception to prompt payment.

**12.0 TAXES**: The State of Wisconsin and its agencies are exempt from
payment of all federal tax and Wisconsin state and local taxes on its
purchases except Wisconsin excise taxes as described below.

The State of Wisconsin, including all its agencies, is required to pay
the Wisconsin excise or occupation tax on its purchase of beer, liquor,
wine, cigarettes, tobacco products, motor vehicle fuel and general
aviation fuel. However, it is exempt from payment of Wisconsin sales or
use tax on its purchases. The State of Wisconsin may be subject to other
states' taxes on its purchases in that state depending on the laws of
that state. Contractors performing construction activities are required
to pay state use tax on the cost of materials.

**13.0 GUARANTEED DELIVERY**: Failure of the Contractor to adhere to
delivery schedules as specified or to promptly replace rejected
materials shall render the contractor liable for all costs in excess of
the contract price when alternate procurement is necessary. Excess costs
shall include the administrative costs.

**14.0 ENTIRE AGREEMENT**: These Standard Terms and Conditions shall
apply to any contract or order awarded as a result of this request
except where special requirements are stated elsewhere in the request;
in such cases, the special requirements shall apply. Further, the
written contract and/or order with referenced parts and attachments
shall constitute the entire agreement and no other terms and conditions
in any document, acceptance, or acknowledgment shall be effective or
binding unless expressly agreed to in writing by the contracting
authority.

**15.0 APPLICABLE LAW AND COMPLIANCE**: This contract shall be governed
under the laws of the State of Wisconsin. The Contractor shall at all
times comply with and observe all federal and state laws, local laws,
ordinances, and regulations which are in effect during the period of
this contract and which in any manner affect the work or its conduct.
The State of Wisconsin reserves the right to cancel this contract if the
contractor fails to follow the requirements of s. 77.66, Wis. Stats.,
and related statutes regarding certification for collection of sales and
use tax. The State of Wisconsin also reserves the right to cancel this
contract with any federally debarred Contractor or a Contractor that is
presently identified on the list of parties excluded from federal
procurement and non-procurement contracts.

**16.0 ANTITRUST ASSIGNMENT**: The Contractor and the State of Wisconsin
recognize that in actual economic practice, overcharges resulting from
antitrust violations are in fact usually borne by the State of Wisconsin
(purchaser). Therefore, the Contractor hereby assigns to the State of
Wisconsin any and all claims for such overcharges as to goods, materials
or services purchased in connection with this contract.

**17.0 ASSIGNMENT**: No right or duty in whole or in part of the
Contractor under this contract may be assigned or delegated without the
prior written consent of the State of Wisconsin.

**18.0 WORK CENTER CRITERIA**: A work center must be certified under s.
16.752, Wis. Stats., and must ensure that when engaged in the production
of materials, supplies or equipment or the performance of contractual
services, not less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the total hours of
direct labor are performed by severely handicapped individuals.

**19.0 NONDISCRIMINATION / AFFIRMATIVE ACTION**: In connection with the
performance of work under this contract, the Contractor agrees not to
discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of
age, race, religion, color, handicap, sex, physical condition,
developmental disability as defined in s. 51.01(5), Wis. Stats., sexual
orientation as defined in s. 111.32(13m), Wis. Stats., or national
origin. This provision shall include, but not be limited to, the
following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment or
recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other
forms of compensation; and selection for training, including
apprenticeship. Except with respect to sexual orientation, the
Contractor further agrees to take affirmative action to ensure equal
employment opportunities.

**19.1** Contracts estimated to be over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000)
require the submission of a written affirmative action plan by the
Contractor. An exemption occurs from this requirement if the Contractor
has a workforce of less than fifty (50) employees. Within fifteen (15)
working days after the contract is awarded, the Contractor must submit
the plan to the contracting state agency for approval. Instructions on
preparing the plan and technical assistance regarding this clause are
available from the contracting state agency.

**19.2** The Contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available
for employees and applicants for employment, a notice to be provided by
the contracting state agency that sets forth the provisions of the State
of Wisconsin's nondiscrimination law.

**19.3** Failure to comply with the conditions of this clause may result
in the Contractor's becoming declared an "ineligible" Contractor,
termination of the contract, or withholding of payment.

**19.4** Effective October 27, 2017, consistent with 2017 Wisconsin
Executive Order 261, Contractor agrees it is not engaged in a boycott of
the State of Israel and further, Contractor will not during the term of
the contract engage in a boycott of the State of Israel. State agencies
may not execute a contract and reserve the right to terminate an
existing contract with a business entity that is not compliant with this
provision. This provision applies to all contracts of all values.

**20.0 PATENT INFRINGEMENT**: The Contractor selling to the State of
Wisconsin the articles described herein guarantees the articles were
manufactured or produced in accordance with applicable federal labor
laws. Further, that the sale or use of the articles described herein
will not infringe any United States patent. The Contractor covenants
that it will at its own expense defend every suit which shall be brought
against the State of Wisconsin (provided that such Contractor is
promptly notified of such suit, and all papers therein are delivered to
it) for any alleged infringement of any patent by reason of the sale or
use of such articles, and agrees that it will pay all costs, damages,
and profits recoverable in any such suit.

**21.0 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS**: All materials, equipment, and supplies
provided to the State of Wisconsin must comply fully with all safety
requirements as set forth by the Wisconsin Administrative Code and all
applicable OSHA Standards.

**22.0 WARRANTY**: Unless otherwise specifically stated by the
bidder/proposer, equipment purchased as a result of this request shall
be warranted against defects by the bidder/proposer for one (1) year
from date of receipt. The equipment manufacturer's standard warranty
shall apply as a minimum and must be honored by the Contractor.

**23.0 INSURANCE RESPONSIBILITY**: The Contractor performing services
for the State of Wisconsin shall:

**23.1** Maintain worker's compensation insurance as required by
Wisconsin Statutes, for all employees engaged in the work.

**23.2** Maintain commercial liability, bodily injury and property
damage insurance against any claim(s) which might occur in carrying out
this agreement/contract. Minimum coverage shall be one million dollars
($1,000,000) liability for bodily injury and property damage including
products liability and completed operations. Provide motor vehicle
insurance for all owned, non-owned and hired vehicles that are used in
carrying out this contract. Minimum coverage shall be one million
dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence combined single limit for automobile
liability and property damage.

**23.3** The state reserves the right to require higher or lower limits
where warranted.

**24.0 CANCELLATION**: The State of Wisconsin reserves the right to
cancel any contract in whole or in part without penalty due to
nonappropriation of funds or for failure of the Contractor to comply
with terms, conditions, and specifications of this contract.

**25.0 CONTRACTOR TAX DELINQUENCY**: Contractors who have a delinquent
Wisconsin tax liability may have their payments offset by the State of
Wisconsin.

**26.0 PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS**: It is the intention of the state to
maintain an open and public process in the solicitation, submission,
review, and approval of procurement activities. Bid/proposal openings
are public unless otherwise specified. Records may not be available for
public inspection prior to issuance of the notice of intent to award or
the award of the contract. Pursuant to §19.36 (3), Wis. Stats., all
records of the Contractor that are produced or collected under this
contract are subject to disclosure pursuant to a public records request.
Upon receipt of notice from the State of Wisconsin of a public records
request for records produced or collected under this contract, the
Contractor shall provide the requested records to the contracting
agency. The Contractor, following final payment, shall retain all
records produced or collected under this contract for six (6) years.

**27.0 PROPRIETARY INFORMATION**: Any restrictions on the use of data
contained within a request, must be clearly stated in the bid/proposal
itself. Proprietary information submitted in response to a request will
be handled in accordance with applicable State of Wisconsin procurement
regulations and the Wisconsin public records law. Proprietary
restrictions normally are not accepted. However, when accepted, it is
the Contractor's responsibility to defend the determination in the event
of an appeal or litigation.

**27.1** Data contained in a bid/proposal, all documentation provided
therein, and innovations developed as a result of the contracted
commodities or services cannot be copyrighted or patented. All data,
documentation, and innovations become the property of the State of
Wisconsin.

**27.2** Any material submitted by the Contractor in response to this
request that the Contractor considers confidential and proprietary
information and which qualifies as a trade secret, as provided in s.
19.36(5), Wis. Stats., or material which can be kept confidential under
the Wisconsin public records law, must be identified on a Designation of
Confidential and Proprietary Information form (DOA-3027).
Bidders/proposers may request the form if it is not part of the Request
for Bid/Request for Proposal package. Bid/proposal prices cannot be held
confidential.

**28.0 DISCLOSURE**: If a state public official (s. 19.42, Wis. Stats.),
a member of a state public official's immediate family, or any
organization in which a state public official or a member of the
official's immediate family owns or controls a ten percent (10%)
interest, is a party to this agreement, and if this agreement involves
payment of more than three thousand dollars ($3,000) within a twelve
(12) month period, this contract is voidable by the state unless
appropriate disclosure is made according to s. 19.45(6), Wis. Stats.,
before signing the contract. Disclosure must be made to the State of
Wisconsin Ethics Board, 44 East Mifflin Street, Suite 601, Madison,
Wisconsin 53703 (Telephone 608-266-8123).

State classified and former employees and certain University of
Wisconsin faculty/staff are subject to separate disclosure requirements,
s. 16.417, Wis. Stats.

**29.0 RECYCLED MATERIALS**: The State of Wisconsin is required to
purchase products incorporating recycled materials whenever technically
and economically feasible. Bidders are encouraged to bid products with
recycled content which meet specifications.

**30.0 MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET**: If any item(s) on an order(s)
resulting from this award(s) is a hazardous chemical, as defined under
29CFR 1910.1200, provide one (1) copy of a Material Safety Data Sheet
for each item with the shipped container(s) and one (1) copy with the
invoice(s).

**31.0 PROMOTIONAL ADVERTISING / NEWS RELEASES**: Reference to or use of
the State of Wisconsin, any of its departments, agencies or other
subunits, or any state official or employee for commercial promotion is
prohibited. News releases pertaining to this procurement shall not be
made without prior approval of the State of Wisconsin. Release of
broadcast e-mails pertaining to this procurement shall not be made
without prior written authorization of the contracting agency.

**32.0 HOLD HARMLESS**: The Contractor will indemnify and save harmless
the State of Wisconsin and all of its officers, agents and employees
from all suits, actions, or claims of any character brought for or on
account of any injuries or damages received by any persons or property
resulting from the operations of the Contractor, or of any of its
Contractors, in prosecuting work under this agreement.

**33.0 FOREIGN CORPORATION**: A foreign corporation (any corporation
other than a Wisconsin corporation) which becomes a party to this
Agreement is required to conform to all the requirements of Chapter 180,
Wis. Stats., relating to a foreign corporation and must possess a
certificate of authority from the Wisconsin Department of Financial
Institutions, unless the corporation is transacting business in
interstate commerce or is otherwise exempt from the requirement of
obtaining a certificate of authority. Any foreign corporation which
desires to apply for a certificate of authority should contact the
Department of Financial Institutions, Division of Corporation, P. O. Box
7846, Madison, WI 53707-7846; telephone (608) 261-7577.

**34.0 WORK CENTER PROGRAM**: The successful bidder/proposer shall agree
to implement processes that allow the State agencies, including the
University of Wisconsin System, to satisfy the State's obligation to
purchase goods and services produced by work centers certified under the
State Use Law, s.16.752, Wis. Stat. This shall result in requiring the
successful bidder/proposer to include products provided by work centers
in its catalog for State agencies and campuses or to block the sale of
comparable items to State agencies and campuses.

**35.0 FORCE MAJEURE**: Neither party shall be in default by reason of
any failure in performance of this Agreement in accordance with
reasonable control and without fault or negligence on their part. Such
causes may include, but are not restricted to, acts of nature or the
public enemy, acts of the government in either its sovereign or
contractual capacity, fires, floods, epidemics, quarantine restrictions,
strikes, freight embargoes and unusually severe weather, but in every
case the failure to perform such must be beyond the reasonable control
and without the fault or negligence of the party.

## Supplemental Terms and Conditions (DOA-3681)

**1.0 ACCEPTANCE OF BID/PROPOSAL CONTENT:** The contents of the
bid/proposal of the successful Contractor will become contractual
obligations if procurement action ensues.

**2.0 CERTIFICATION OF INDEPENDENT PRICE DETERMINATION:** By signing
this bid/proposal, the bidder/proposer certifies, and in the case of a
joint bid/proposal, each party thereto certifies as to its own
organization, that in connection with this procurement:

**2.1** The prices in this bid/proposal have been arrived at
independently, without consultation, communication, or agreement, for
the purpose of restricting competition, as to any matter relating to
such prices with any other bidder/proposer or with any competitor;

**2.2** Unless otherwise required by law, the prices which have been
quoted in this bid/proposal have not been knowingly disclosed by the
bidder/proposer and will not knowingly be disclosed by the
bidder/proposer prior to opening in the case of an advertised
procurement or prior to award in the case of a negotiated procurement,
directly or indirectly to any other bidder/proposer or to any
competitor; and

**2.3** No attempt has been made or will be made by the bidder/proposer
to induce any other person or firm to submit or not to submit a
bid/proposal for the purpose of restricting competition.

**2.4** Each person signing this bid/proposal certifies that: He/she is
the person in the bidder's/proposer's organization responsible within
that organization for the decision as to the prices being offered herein
and that he/she has not participated, and will not participate, in any
action contrary to 2.1 through 2.3 above; (or)

He/she is not the person in the bidder's/proposer's organization
responsible within that organization for the decision as to the prices
being offered herein, but that he/she has been authorized in writing to
act as agent for the persons responsible for such decisions in
certifying that such persons have not participated, and will not
participate in any action contrary to 2.1 through 2.3 above, and as
their agent does hereby so certify; and he/she has not participated, and
will not participate, in any action contrary to 2.1 through 2.3 above.

**3.0 DISCLOSURE OF INDEPENDENCE AND RELATIONSHIP**:

**3.1** Prior to award of any contract, a potential Contractor shall
certify in writing to the procuring agency that no relationship exists
between the potential Contractor and the procuring or contracting agency
that interferes with fair competition or is a conflict of interest, and
no relationship exists between the Contractor and another person or
organization that constitutes a conflict of interest with respect to a
state contract. The Department of Administration may waive this
provision, in writing, if those activities of the potential Contractor
will not be adverse to the interests of the state.

**3.2** Contractors shall agree as part of the contract for services
that during performance of the contract, the contractor will neither
provide contractual services nor enter into any agreement to provide
services to a person or organization that is regulated or funded by the
contracting agency or has interests that are adverse to the contracting
agency. The Department of Administration may waive this provision, in
writing, if those activities of the contractor will not be adverse to
the interests of the state.

**4.0 DUAL EMPLOYMENT**: Section 16.417, Wis. Stats., prohibits an
individual who is a State of Wisconsin employee or who is retained as a
contractor full-time by a State of Wisconsin agency from being retained
as a contractor by the same or another State of Wisconsin agency where
the individual receives more than $12,000 as compensation for the
individual’s services during the same year. This prohibition does not
apply to individuals who have full-time appointments for less than
twelve (12) months during any period of time that is not included in the
appointment. It does not include corporations or partnerships.

**5.0 EMPLOYMENT**: The contractor will not engage the services of any
person or persons now employed by the State of Wisconsin, including any
department, commission or board thereof, to provide services relating to
this agreement without the written consent of the employing agency of
such person or persons and of the contracting agency.

**6.0 CONFLICT OF INTEREST**: Private and non-profit corporations are
bound by ss. 180.0831, 180.1911(1), and 181.0831 Wis. Stats., regarding
conflicts of interests by directors in the conduct of state contracts.

**7.0 RECORDKEEPING AND RECORD RETENTION**: The contractor shall
establish and maintain adequate records of all expenditures incurred
under the contract. All records must be kept in accordance with
generally accepted accounting procedures. All procedures must be in
accordance with federal, state and local ordinances.

The contracting agency shall have the right to audit, review, examine,
copy, and transcribe any pertinent records or documents relating to any
contract resulting from this bid/proposal held by the Contractor.

It is the intention of the state to maintain an open and public process
in the solicitation, submission, review, and approval of procurement
activities. Bid/proposal openings are public unless otherwise specified.
Records may not be available for public inspection prior to issuance of
the notice of intent to award or the award of the contract. Pursuant to
§19.36 (3), Wis. Stats., all records of the Contractor that are produced
or collected under this contract are subject to disclosure pursuant to a
public records request. Upon receipt of notice from the State of
Wisconsin of a public records request for records produced or collected
under this contract, the Contractor shall provide the requested records
to the contracting agency. The Contractor, following final payment,
shall retain all records produced or collected under this contract for
six (6) years.

**8.0 INDEPENDENT CAPACITY OF CONTRACTOR**: The parties hereto agree
that the Contractor, its officers, agents, and employees, in the
performance of this agreement shall act in the capacity of an
independent Contractor and not as an officer, employee, or agent of the
state. The Contractor agrees to take such steps as may be necessary to
ensure that each subcontractor of the Contractor will be deemed to be an
independent Contractor and will not be considered or permitted to be an
agent, servant, joint venturer, or partner of the state.

## Special Terms and Conditions

1.  **Payment Terms and Invoicing**

> Contractor agrees that all invoices shall reflect the contracted
> price(s) as detailed in the applicable pricing attachments or
> addendums.
>
> The Contractor shall invoice DWD for services performed in accordance
> with the Contract on a monthly basis. Only properly submitted invoices
> will be processed for payment. Prompt payment requires that Contractor
> invoices be clear and in conformity with the instructions below.
>
> All invoices must be itemized showing:
>
> Contractor name;
>
> Remit to address;
>
> Purchase order number; and
>
> Number of hours worked broken down by labor category and date.
>
> The original invoice must be sent to the applicable DWD address which
> will be provided to the Contractor prior to Contract start date.
>
> The State shall meet a statutory mandate to pay or reject invoices
> within 30 days of receipt by the agency. Before payment is made, the
> agency shall verify that all invoiced charges are correct as per this
> Contract. Only properly submitted invoices shall be officially
> received for payment. Prompt payment requires that invoices be clear
> and complete.
>
> The Contractor is limited to providing the services contracted for in
> the terms of the Contract. Services provided outside the terms of the
> Contract will be considered “out of scope.” DWD will only pay for
> services within the scope of this Contract. DWD may authorize
> expanding the scope of services over and above what is specified in
> the Contract. DWD's authorization to expand the scope of services must
> be in writing and must be approved by the Contract Administrator prior
> to the addition of services. Invoices sent to DWD for items not
> covered by the Contract will be denied for payment.

2.  **Data Rights and Ownership of Deliverables**

> Unless otherwise agreed to by DWD and the Contractor, all software and
> documentation delivered by the Contractor will be owned by DWD and
> free of copyright by either using an open source license or committing
> the work to the public domain. This software and documentation
> includes, but is not limited to, data, documents, graphics, code,
> plans, reports, schedules, schemas, metadata, architecture designs,
> and the like; all new open source software created by the Contractor
> and forks or branches of current open source software where the
> Contractor has made a modification; and all new tooling, scripting
> configuration management, infrastructure as code, or any other final
> changes or edits to successfully deploy or operate the software.
>
> To the extent that the Contractor seeks to incorporate any software
> that was not first produced in the performance of this Contract in the
> software delivered under this Contract, DWD encourages the Contractor
> to incorporate either software that is in the public domain or free
> and open source software that qualifies under the Open Source
> Definition promulgated by the Open Source Initiative. In any event,
> the Contractor must promptly disclose to DWD in writing, and list in
> the documentation, any software incorporated in the delivered software
> that is subject to a license.
>
> If software delivered by the Contractor incorporates software that is
> subject to an open source license that provides implementation
> guidance, then the Contractor must ensure compliance with that
> guidance. If software delivered by the Contractor incorporates
> software that is subject to an open source license that does not
> provide implementation guidance, then the Contractor must attach or
> include the terms of the license within the work itself, such as in
> code comments at the beginning of a file, or in a license file within
> a software repository.
>
> In addition, the Contractor must obtain written permission from DWD
> before incorporating into the delivered software any software that is
> subject to a license that does not qualify under the Open Source
> Definition promulgated by the Open Source Initiative. If DWD grants
> such written permission, then the Contractor’s rights to use that
> software must be promptly assigned to DWD.

3.  **Subcontractors**

> The Contractor is responsible for Contract performance when
> subcontractors are used. When subcontractors are used, they must abide
> by all terms and conditions of the Contract.
>
> All subcontractors shall be approved in writing by DWD. Any proposed
> substitution of an approved subcontractor shall be submitted in
> writing to the Product Owner 30 days prior to implementation of the
> substitution, and include the substitute's qualifications, the reason
> for the change, and the intended effective date of the substitution.
> Failure to notify the Product Owner may result in cancellation of the
> Contract without notice and without penalty to the State.

4.  **Mandatory Personnel**

> The Project Manager and Technical Lead are designated as Mandatory
> Personnel for this Contract. Any change to the Mandatory Personnel
> identified in the Contractor's proposal and accepted by DWD must be
> approved in advance and in writing by the Product Owner. Personnel
> changes that are not approved by DWD may be grounds for DWD to
> terminate the Contract. In requesting to make a change to the
> Mandatory Personnel, the Contractor must provide the Product Owner the
> resume of the proposed substitute and any other information requested
> by the Product Lead or needed by DWD to approve or disapprove of the
> substitution.

5.  **Contract Amendments**

> This Contract may be amended upon the written mutual agreement of the
> Contractor and DWD.

6.  **Termination for Cause**

> DWD may terminate the Contract for cause if the Contractor breaches
> its terms. DWD's right to terminate for cause may only be exercised if
> the Contractor fails to cure its breach of this Contract within 10
> calendar days of receiving written notice of said breach from DWD. In
> the event of termination for cause by DWD, the Contractor shall only
> be entitled to receive compensation for any payments owed under the
> Contract at the time of termination.

7.  **Termination for Convenience**

> Either party may terminate this Contract at any time, without cause,
> by providing a written notice to the other party at least 30 days in
> advance of the intended date of termination. In the event of
> termination for convenience by the Contractor or DWD, the Contractor
> shall be entitled to receive compensation for any services it provided
> prior to the date of termination.

8.  **Suspension and Debarment**

> This Contract is a covered transaction for purposes of 2 C.F.R. pt.
> 180. As such, the Contractor is required to verify that none of the
> Contractor’s principals (defined at 2 C.F.R. § 180.995) or its
> affiliates (defined at 2 C.F.R. § 180.905) are excluded (defined at 2
> C.F.R. § 180.940) or disqualified (defined at 2 C.F.R. § 180.935).
>
> The Contractor must comply with 2 C.F.R. pt. 180, subpart C, and must
> include a requirement to comply with these regulations in any lower
> tier covered transaction it enters into.

9.  **Use of Federal Funds**

> This is an acknowledgement that Federal funds will be used to fund all
> or a portion of this Contract. The Federal Government is not a party
> to this Contract and is not subject to any obligations or liabilities
> to the non-Federal entity, Contractor, or any other party pertaining
> to any matter resulting from the Contract.

10. **Clean Air Act and Federal Water Pollution Control Act**

> The Contractor agrees to comply with all applicable standards, orders
> or regulations issued pursuant to the Clean Air Act, as amended, 42
> U.S.C. § 7401 et seq. The Contractor also agrees to comply with all
> applicable standards, orders, or regulations issued pursuant to the
> Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
> seq.

11. **Data Sharing**

> To comply with 20 C.F.R. pt. 603, Wis. Stat. § 108.14(7) and Wisconsin
> Administrative Code ch. DWD 149 ("DWD 149"), the Contractor agrees to
> the provisions specified the Confidentiality and Safeguards Agreement
> for Unemployment Insurance Data, which is incorporated herein by
> reference, for the use of all Unemployment Insurance data disclosed
> under this Contract.
>
> Note: DWD will provide the Confidentiality and Safeguards Agreement
> for Unemployment Insurance Data (Agreement) for review by Offerors
> with the finalized RFP. The Contractor shall be required to sign an
> Agreement upon Contract award.
>
> Under this Contract, DWD will not disclose to the Contractor any
> Federal Tax information (FTI), including tax returns or return
> information received directly from the Internal Revenue Service or
> obtained through an authorized secondary source, such as Social
> Security Administration (SSA). DWD will also not disclose to the
> Contractor any information it has received or accessed from the SSA
> under its Information Exchange Agreement with the SSA. If DWD
> identifies the need for the Contractor to have access to SSA-provided
> data during the period of performance, DWD and the Contractor shall
> mutually agree to the terms for that data sharing through an amendment
> to the Contract.

12. **Cyber Liability Coverage**

> DWD requires Professional Liability (Errors and Omissions) with Cyber
> insurance coverage with the following minimums:  five million dollars
> ($5,000,000.00) each occurrence or claim, and ten million dollars
> ($10,000,000.00) annual aggregate.
>
> Professional Liability/Privacy Liability Insurance shall cover all
> acts, errors, omissions, negligence, and network risks including
> coverage for unauthorized access, failure of security, breach of
> privacy perils, as well as notification costs and regulatory defense
> in the performance of service for the DWD and the State of Wisconsin.
> Such insurance shall be maintained in force at all times during the
> term of the Contract and for a period of three (3) years thereafter
> for services completed during the term of the Contract.

13. **Confidential Information**

    1.  Definitions

        1.  “Confidential Information” means all tangible and intangible
            > information and materials, excluding any Unemployment
            > Insurance Data as defined in the Confidentiality and
            > Safeguard Agreement for Unemployment Insurance Data ,
            > being disclosed by one party to another hereunder in
            > connection with this Contract, in any form or medium (and
            > without regard to whether the information is owned by a
            > party or by a third party), that satisfy at least one of
            > the following criteria: (i) Personally Identifiable
            > Information; (ii) non-public information related to the
            > State’s employees, customers, technology (including data
            > bases, data processing and communications networking
            > systems), schematics, specifications, and all information
            > or materials derived therefrom or based thereon; or (iii)
            > information qualifying as a trade secret, as defined in
            > Wis. Stat. § 134.90(1)(c).

        2.  “Personally Identifiable Information” means an individual’s
            > last name and the individual’s first name or first
            > initial, in combination with and linked to any of the
            > following elements, if that element is not publicly
            > available information and is not encrypted, redacted, or
            > altered in any manner that renders the element
            > unreadable: (a) the individual’s Social Security
            > number; (b) the individual’s driver’s license number or
            > state identification number; (c) the number of the
            > individual’s financial account, including a credit or
            > debit card account number, or any security code, access
            > code, or password that would permit access to the
            > individual’s financial account; (d) the individual’s DNA
            > profile; or (e) the individual’s unique biometric data,
            > including fingerprint, voice print, retina or iris image,
            > or any other unique physical representation, and any other
            > unique physical characteristic protected by applicable
            > state or federal law. Such information shall be limited to
            > the information that DWD provides to Contractor or
            > Contractor otherwise acquires from or on behalf of DWD for
            > the purpose of Contractor’s use of such information in the
            > performance of its Services pursuant to the Contract.

        3.  “Corrective Action Plan” means a plan mutually agreed upon
            > by the Contractor and the DWD for the Contractor to follow
            > in the event of any actual use or disclosure of any
            > Confidential Information that is not authorized by this
            > Contract, or in the event that any Confidential
            > Information is lost (excluding an unintended deletion) by
            > the Contractor.

    2.  Duty of Non-Disclosure and Security Precautions

        1.  Each party (each, a “receiving party”) shall not use
            > Confidential Information of the other party (each, a
            > “disclosing party”) for any purpose other than the limited
            > purposes set forth in the Contract and all related and
            > necessary actions taken in fulfillment of the obligations
            > thereunder. The receiving party shall hold the
            > Confidential Information of the disclosing party in
            > confidence and shall not disclose such Confidential
            > Information to any persons other than those directors,
            > officers, employees, and agents of receiving party (and in
            > the case of Contractor, the directors, officers,
            > employees, and agents of its subcontractors, affiliates,
            > and related entities, whether located within or outside of
            > the United States) who have a business-related need to
            > have access to such information in order to carry out
            > their responsibilities under the Contract, except as
            > otherwise permitted herein. Receiving party’s employees
            > with access must be apprised of, and agree to maintain,
            > the confidential nature of such information in accordance
            > with the terms of this Contract.

> The prohibition on disclosure of the Contractor's Confidential
> Information does not apply to DWD to the extent that a third-party
> requests records obtaining such information and the records are
> required to be disclosed under the Wisconsin Public Records Law, Wis.
> Stat. §§ 19.31–19.39.

2.  Each party shall institute and maintain such security procedures as
    > are reasonably required to maintain the confidentiality of the
    > Confidential Information while in its possession or control and
    > shall apply the same level of care as it employs to protect its
    > own Confidential Information of like nature, but at least a
    > reasonable degree of care.

3.  Each receiving party agrees that all written notations of
    > confidentiality contained on or included in any item of
    > Confidential Information provided to receiving party by the
    > disclosing party shall be included by receiving party on any
    > reproduction, modification, or translation of such Confidential
    > Information. If requested by disclosing party, receiving party
    > shall make a reasonable effort to add a proprietary notice or
    > indication of confidentiality to any tangible materials within its
    > possession that contain Confidential Information of the receiving
    > party, as directed.

4.  The Contractor shall return all Personally Identifiable Information
    > it maintains, possesses, or controls upon termination of this
    > Contract, or as otherwise directed by DWD. Notwithstanding the
    > foregoing, the Contractor may retain Confidential Information that
    > has been redacted to eliminate Personally Identifiable Information
    > for archival purposes to evidence Contractor’s services under the
    > Contract.

<!-- -->

3.  Limitations on Obligations

> There shall be no obligation of confidentiality with respect to any
> information (excluding Personally Identifiable Information) that (a)
> is or becomes publicly available other than as the result of a
> disclosure in breach hereof by the receiving party; (b) becomes
> available to the receiving party on a nonconfidential basis from a
> source that the receiving party believes is not prohibited from
> disclosing such information to the receiving party; (c) is already
> known by the receiving party without any obligation of confidentiality
> with respect thereto; (d) is developed by the receiving party
> independently of any disclosures made to the receiving party
> hereunder; or (e) is required to be disclosed by receiving party by
> any law, regulation, judicial or administrative process, or in
> accordance with applicable professional standards or rules, or in
> connection with litigation or arbitration pertaining to this Contract.

4.  Unauthorized Use, Disclosure, or Loss

> Promptly upon becoming aware of any threatened or actual use or
> disclosure of any Confidential Information of the disclosing party
> that is in violation of this Contract, the receiving party shall
> notify the disclosing party promptly, but no later than three business
> days after receiving party becomes aware of such use or disclosure.
> Such notice shall include, to the best of the Contractor’s knowledge
> at that time, the Confidential Information disclosed.
>
> The receiving party shall take prompt steps to mitigate any harmful
> effects of the unauthorized use, disclosure, or loss of Confidential
> Information of the disclosing party. The receiving party shall
> reasonably cooperate with the disclosing party’s efforts to seek
> appropriate injunctive relief or otherwise prevent or curtail such
> threatened or actual breach, or to recover its Confidential
> Information, including complying with a Corrective Action Plan.

5.  Equitable Relief

> The Contractor acknowledges and agrees that the unauthorized use,
> disclosure, or loss of Confidential Information may cause immediate
> and irreparable injury to the individuals whose information is
> disclosed and to DWD and the State, which injury will not be
> compensable by money damages and for which there is not an adequate
> remedy available at law. Accordingly, the parties specifically agree
> that the State, on its own behalf or on behalf of the affected
> individuals, shall be entitled to seek injunctive or other equitable
> relief to prevent or curtail any such breach, threatened or actual,
> without posting security and without prejudice to such other rights as
> may be available under this Contract or under applicable law.

6.  Compliance Reviews

> Upon reasonable advance written notice to the Contractor, DWD may
> conduct a compliance review of the Contractor’s security procedures in
> place to protect its Confidential Information under this Contract. In
> exercising its rights under this Section, the State shall not
> interfere with Contractor’s performance of services to the DWD.

7.  Survival

> The respective rights and obligations under this clause shall survive
> termination or expiration of this Contract.

14. **Contractor Personnel Lists**

> As soon as practicable after Contract award, the Contractor shall
> provide DWD a list of all Contractor personnel, including
> subcontractors, who will be performing work under this Contract. In
> this list, the Contractor must also note which personnel require
> access to DWD data or networks.
>
> The Contractor shall also notify DWD of the following changes:

1.  The Contractor shall notify DWD of any new Contractor personnel who
    > will be performing work under the Contract a minimum of 5 business
    > days prior to allowing them to begin performing work.

2.  The Contractor shall notify DWD of any personnel who will no longer
    > be assigned to perform work under this Contract a minimum of 5
    > business days prior to making the personnel change for planned
    > departures and within 8 business hours for unplanned departures.

<!-- -->

15. **Criminal Background Checks**

> The Contractor shall submit a validation of a criminal background
> check for each individual assigned to the Contract, including
> subcontractor personnel. In conducting these required background
> checks, the following provisions apply:

1.  DWD requires background checks of its contracted personnel for the
    > same policy reasons the state legislature requires a criminal
    > history background check prior to employment for any position that
    > involves fiduciary responsibility per Wis. Stat. § 230.17(3). DWD
    > has determined that these positions involve fiduciary
    > responsibility and are thus subject to background check.

2.  The background check is to check whether a contracted personnel has
    > a conviction record, defined as "information indicating that an
    > individual has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or other
    > offense, has been adjudicated delinquent, has been less than
    > honorably discharged, or has been placed on probation, fined,
    > imprisoned, placed on extended supervision or paroled pursuant to
    > any law enforcement or military authority" per Wis. Stat. §
    > 111.32(3).

3.  Prior to conducting work for DWD, the Contractor must run a
    > conviction record background check of each contracted personnel
    > they intend to assign to DWD and make a determination by comparing
    > the position description to the elements of the crimes as to
    > whether the conviction record is substantially related to the
    > position and, therefore, a permitted reason to refuse to employ
    > under Wis. Stat. § 111.335(2)(a).

4.  If the Contractor makes the determination an individual does not
    > have a conviction record substantially related to the position,
    > the Contractor must certify that to us for each contracted
    > personnel assigned to DWD.

5.  If the Contractor makes the determination that the conviction is
    > substantially related, then they must notify DWD of the results if
    > they nonetheless want this individual to perform work under the
    > Contract, so DWD can determine whether mitigating circumstance
    > exist to allow the contracted personnel to perform work at DWD.

<!-- -->

16. **UI Security Checks**

> UI will conduct a security check of all Contractor personnel,
> including subcontractor personnel, who will have access Unemployment
> Insurance Data to perform work under this Contract. The Contractor
> agrees that any Ccontractor or subcontractor personnel who does not
> pass this UI security check will not be assigned to perform any work
> under this Contract.

17. **Identity Verification**

> The Contractor is responsible for doing I-9/E-verify checks for all
> Contractor personnel who will be performing work under this Contract.

# Appendix A: Initial User Stories

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><em><strong>Major Areas of Work to Modernize</strong></em></th>
<th><em><strong>Associated Relevant work</strong></em></th>
<th><em><strong>Current State</strong></em></th>
<th><em><strong>User Need (Future)</strong></em></th>
<th><em><strong>So that… (Intended outcome/reasoning)</strong></em></th>
<th><em><strong>Initial success metrics</strong></em></th>
<th><em><strong>Known Risks and dependencies</strong></em></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td rowspan="8"><strong>Automating Currently Manual Processes<br />
<br />
</strong>Manual processing causes greatest delay for claimants, staff have a need and desire to automate these processes. Outlier cases, changes to rules, and new programs are challenging to implement and require manual fixes. These rules are hardcoded and need to be adaptable to new programs.</td>
<td>Build a bridge API, and produce a streamlined data model</td>
<td>Currently, ASP has to process an enormous volume of manual cases (250k in 2020) - to do something to the claim the system can't do. Spend time on simple fixes</td>
<td>As a staff person in ASP, my claims work is more automated. Manual claims are lower in volume and "system audits" are less necessary</td>
<td>So that my time would otherwise be spent on more impactful work (e.g., troubleshooting rare exceptions) and claimants can receive their benefits faster</td>
<td># of claims that must be manually adjusted</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Understand and automate manual workflows in ASP</td>
<td>Currently, ASP performs manual calculations through Excel for a number of processes that then have to be maintained</td>
<td>As an ASP member, I need to retain the Excel files</td>
<td>In order to have a complete claimant record and meet record retention requirements</td>
<td>% of cases that have manual production</td>
<td>Number of unique situations that may result in reverting to manual processes</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td>Currently, ASP performs manual calculations through Excel for a number of processes that then have to be maintained<br />
<br />
Currently, the system “can’t move money around” (make adjustments) to the correct employers accounts without manual intervention<br />
<br />
Currently, after an adjudication on wage concealment – what is collected from the employer, what the adjudicator entered into the system, and what is showing in the system need to be manually checked</td>
<td>As an ASP member, I need the system to perform common calculations myself</td>
<td><p>So that I don't need to use a workaround like an Excel worksheet<br />
<br />
So that claims can be processed as quickly as possible and the claimants receive their benefits without delay</p>
<p>So that employer's accounts are correct without manual intervention</p></td>
<td>% of cases that have manual production<br />
<br />
Manually adjusted claims do not show in the “reject” pile more than once</td>
<td>Number of unique situations that may result in reverting to manual processes<br />
<br />
Manually adjusted claims do not get correctly processed by automatic procedures</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Understand and automate manual workflows in ASP</td>
<td>Currently, after some claims are manually adjusted, they continue to need manual adjustment</td>
<td>As an UI staff member, I need to be able to retroactively adjust claims</td>
<td>So that error corrections do not create more manual work</td>
<td><p># of claim corrections that result in manual work</p>
<p># of hours spent manually adjusting claims</p></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Understand and automate manual workflows in ASP</td>
<td>Currently, during spike times, a person needs to review every PUA application. This is unwieldy.</td>
<td>As an ASP staff member, I need to review PUA applications through an automated system</td>
<td>So that I can free up my time for other tasks and applicants get faster determinations on their benefits</td>
<td># of PUA applications that need direct review</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Make and test some strategic, smaller UX changes to existing interfaces for quick, high-value wins with impact for users</td>
<td>Currently, it can take months for a claim to be assigned to ASP</td>
<td>As a claimant, I need to receive my unemployment check quickly and know where it is in the pipeline through my portal or through notices</td>
<td>So that I timely receive the benefits due</td>
<td>Time to claim payment</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Understand and automate manual workflows in ASP</td>
<td>Currently, ASP senior staff spend a lot of time looking through claims in order to assign them to newer staff members</td>
<td>As an ASP manager I need to quickly prioritize work for my direct reports</td>
<td>So that work can be assigned at the right skill level and claims can be processed quickly</td>
<td>Senior ASP staff reduce the amount of time they spend on task assignment by x amount of hours</td>
<td>Uneven distribution of work</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Currently, during spike times, a person needs to review every PUA application.</td>
<td>Currently, claims that get adjusted manually once likely have to always be manually adjusted in the future</td>
<td>As an ASP staff member, I need to review PUA applications through an automated system</td>
<td>So that I can free up my time for other tasks and applicants get faster access to their benefit.</td>
<td># of PUA applications that need direct review</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table style="width:100%;">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td rowspan="6"><p><strong>Batch processing</strong></p>
<p>Batch processes are the part of the system that executes code for all new and old programs, and any fixes. A series of entangled logic, this is a major point of potential system failure and is time consuming to run, daily (it is not real time). Not fully documented by any one person. The daily timing of this process matters to processing bank transactions, there is a daily cutoff. Of the batch processes, check-writing, also known as monetaries, is the most critical and biggest bundle of “batch spaghetti.” There is a need for documentation of the current state. These programs involve a third party ACH integration with USBank.</p></td>
<td>Make some strategic, small UX changes to existing interfaces for quick wins/outsized impact on users</td>
<td>Currently, the nightly batch jobs must run before a claim succeeds or fails</td>
<td>As a UI staff member, I need real-time data about claims</td>
<td>So that I can give up-to-date information to claimants</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Invest time in documenting the mainframe system, start with monetaries</td>
<td>Currently, batch processes are modules of code that have been built up for decades. Editing the code requires developers to spend time reading thousands of lines of code to decide what to write</td>
<td>As an application developer, I need documentation about the interactions of batch processes</td>
<td>So that I can write code with less risk of causing problems in the nightly jobs</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td>Currently, errors are detected as part of the batch job. If there is bad data, it will either break the job or need to be corrected the next day.</td>
<td>As a UI staff member, I need an early indication of problems in the data</td>
<td>So that I can fix them before the batch job runs</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Make some strategic, small UX changes to existing interfaces for quick wins that provide meaningful impact on users</td>
<td>Currently, tax staff must detect any possible fraud cases by 10:30 PM when check-writing occurs, otherwise they need to try and reverse the ACH transaction the next morning</td>
<td>As a UI staff member, I need to be able to flag fraudulent cases at any time</td>
<td>So that claimants are protected and money is not sent out to fraudsters</td>
<td>% of fraud cases that can be caught without reversing an ACH?</td>
<td><p>No time deadlines makes it more difficult to detect which money was sent out and what wasn’t</p>
<p>Increase in false positives (i.e. rightful claimants get denied)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Invest time in documenting the mainframe system, start with monetaries</td>
<td>Currently, batch processes are modules of code that have been built up for decades. Editing the code requires developers to spend time reading thousands of lines of code to decide what to write</td>
<td>As a developer, I need to understand how the batch processes represent UI program needs</td>
<td>So that I can build an implementation to achieve an outcome in an alternate system and disable a corresponding batch process</td>
<td><p># of UI responsibilities no longer owned by batch processes</p>
<p># of batch processes disabled</p></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>As UI staff member, I need shorter development times for new features</td>
<td>So that the system can stay current with our needs</td>
<td>Time from user story scoping to deployment</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>As a UI staff member, I need to know if a claim will be rejected in real time</td>
<td>So that I can avoid needing to return to that claim the next day to fix it</td>
<td># of claims that need to be fixed after the first day</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

#

# Appendix B: Acceptance Criteria

## Work meets defined acceptance criteria

Together with the product owner, this team will be comfortable building
and maintaining a work inventory. This work inventory keeps the team on
track towards the product vision, and serves as a way for stakeholders
to track the team’s progress.

At the beginning of each sprint, the Product Owner and development team
will collaborate to define a set of user stories to be completed during
the sprint. Acceptance criteria for each story will also be defined. The
development team will deliver code and functionality to satisfy these
user stories.

### Project tasks are meaningful and well-scoped

Performance standard:

-   Tasks and user stories are based on user research and feedback

-   Tasks are able to be accomplished within one sprint

-   Tasks have defined acceptance criteria

Method of assessment:

-   Manual review of completed tasks and the work inventory, such as
    whether tasks tend to be completed within one sprint, performed once
    per month

### Work makes progress towards the project’s goal

Performance standard:

-   Work delivered meets defined acceptance criteria

-   New features ship within expected time

-   Project roadmap has clear next steps

Method of assessment:

-   Manual review of completed tasks and the roadmap, performed once per
    month

## Code is tested

As part of a robust software development practice, the Contractor will
ensure that code is working properly. Testing is a key part of this.

### Code delivered to DWD meets a high standard of code coverage

Performance standard:

-   90% code coverage for all code

-   All areas of code are meaningfully tested

-   Tests include unit tests, integration tests, and end-to-end tests

-   Tests run as part of an automated continuous integration pipeline

-   Failing tests are written before coding begins and pass when the
    feature is complete

Method and frequency of assessment:

-   Automated code coverage tool runs as part of Continuous
    Integration (CI) pipeline. Overall results are reviewed once per
    sprint.

-   Manual review of tests for completeness, performed once per sprint.

### Tests simulate the variation in data without using production data

Performance standard:

-   Test suite uses randomized data

-   Randomized data generation is updated as the data model grows

Method and frequency of assessment:

-   Manual review of test suite, performed at its initiation and when
    new pieces of data are added to the system

### Tests simulate the conditions of the production environment

Performance standard:

-   The staging environment is able to pass a load test of a
    representative number of requests per minute

Method and frequency of assessment:

-   Manual test using a load-testing tool, performed once per month

## Code is properly styled and well-structured

For maintainability and predictability, the Contractor will ensure that
code uses a consistent and thoughtful style.

### Code is properly styled according to a style guide

Performance standard:

-   0 linting errors

Method and frequency of assessment:

-   Automated results from a tool designed for the project’s core
    language, reviewed once per sprint

-   Manual review of code exempted from linting, re-assessed once per
    month

### Code is well-structured for maintainability and sustainability

Performance standard:

-   0 warnings from a static analysis tool

-   Passing grade from code analysis tool

Method and frequency of assessment:

-   Automated results from a tool designed for the project’s core
    language, reviewed once per sprint

## Product is accessible for all users

Users will be able to use the product easily with temporary or permanent
disabilities. Section 508 provides minimum standards, and Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines 2.1 AA standards supply best practices beyond
those. Minimum standards are provided below.

### Accessibility is continuously ensured

Performance standard:

-   Meets the requirements of the Workforce Innovation Opportunity Act's
    access requirements for individuals with disabilities found at 29
    CFR § 38.15(5). At a minimum, provide electronic and information
    technologies, applications, or adaptations that:

    -   Incorporate accessibility features for individuals with
        disabilities that are consistent with modern accessibility
        standards, such as Section 508 Standards (36 CFR part 1194); and

    -   Have 0 errors for the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
        (WCAG) 2.1 AA or higher standards.

Method and frequency of assessment:

-   Automated results from an a11y scanner as part of the CI pipeline,
    such as [<u>pa11y</u>](https://pa11y.org/) or
    [<u>aXe</u>](https://www.deque.com/axe/), reviewed once per sprint

-   Perform manual testing once a month with tools equivalent to
    [Accessibility Insights](https://accessibilityinsights.io/) and/or
    U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Trusted Tester process

-   Manual testing of new features using assistive technology, performed
    once per month

### Product has multilingual support

Performance standard:

-   Provide meaningful access to individuals with limited English
    proficiency (LEP) in their primary language for all languages
    encountered by the program or required by law

-   User testing includes tests with LEP individuals in their primary
    language or qualified human translators or interpreters to ensure
    the translation or interpretation of vital information is accurate

Method and frequency of assessment:

-   Manual review of providing meaningful access to LEP end product
    users, performed once per month

## Deployment is simple

Code should be deployed frequently, and doing so should be an automated
process. Deploying to production should be a minor event. With the
recognition that even the best-laid plans go awry, rolling back to the
previous version should be simple and fast.

### Code must successfully build and deploy into a staging environment

Performance standard:

-   Automatic deployment to staging environment completes when code is
    merged to the relevant branch

Method of assessment:

-   Manual review of deployment status, performed once per month

### Code is able to be deployed to any environment with a single command

Performance standard:

-   Deployment to production environment occurs when code is merged to
    the production branch or when a release is created

Method of assessment:

-   Manual review of deployment method, performed once per month

### Releases can be rolled back quickly and easily

Performance standard:

-   Rolling back a release to the previous version takes less than 10
    minutes

Method of assessment:

-   Practice runs of release rollbacks, performed once per quarter

## Code and development processes are documented

Clear, usable documentation is critical to the success of this work.
Having a collaborative plan for creating, updating, and assessing
documentation is an important part of this work, and empowering the DWD
team. Specific documentation types may include:

-   System documentation, including all elements required by security
    compliance processes

-   Software development documentation, including installation and
    instructions for use

-   Process documentation for any repeated processes, such as software
    deployments

As a general guide, any work that is tracked will be documented in some
form.

### Documentation is up-to-date and available

Performance standard:

-   Documentation has prominent timestamps

-   Documentation is reviewed for gaps or outdated information

-   Documentation is stored in a system owned by DWD and can be directly
    accessed by DWD staff

Method of assessment:

-   Completion of user stories includes updating relevant documentation

-   Manual review of documentation, performed once per quarter

### Process documentation is easily usable by new team members

Performance standard:

-   Documentation is written in plain language for both non-technical
    users and readers unfamiliar with the project

-   Documentation follows a logical step-by-step flow from the
    perspective of a learner

Method of assessment:

-   User testing of documentation, performed once per quarter

### Code documentation includes all major functionality in the source code

Performance standard:

-   Repository includes narrative documentation of the major components
    and architectural decisions

-   Code includes inline method documentation for all methods

-   System diagrams are available for the entire system

Method of assessment:

-   All new features include relevant documentation, assessed once per
    sprint

-   Manual review of code documentation, performed once per quarter

## Product is secure

Development will follow best practices for application security.
Particular care will be taken to tackle security features early in the
development process, rather than attempting to add them in later.

### Code is free of known vulnerabilities

Performance standard:

-   0 errors from automated static security scanner

-   0 errors from dependency vulnerability scanner

-   0 high or medium errors from a dynamic scanner

-   Scan artifacts are stored in a location available to DWD

Method of assessment:

-   Automated scans as part of CI pipeline using tools for the project’s
    core programming language, reviewed once per sprint

-   Automated scans as part of CI pipeline using OWASP ZAP, reviewed
    once per sprint

-   Manual review of any false positives, re-assessed once per month

## Product is compliant

This product will have oversight from DWD’s security team as well as the
state legislature and federal agencies. The team is encouraged to take a
“shift left” approach to compliance requirements in order to avoid
unexpected delays.

### Compliance tasks are prioritized

Performance standard:

-   Team is familiar with the compliance standards, such as the NIST
    800-53 baseline and IRS Publication 1075

-   Compliance documentation is produced at the same time as the
    features that they cover

Method of assessment:

-   Manual review of work inventory and roadmap, performed once per
    month

### System is positioned to pass audits

Performance standards:

-   Compliance documentation is available and up-to-date

-   Compliance requirements that are not yet completed are tracked in
    the work inventory

Method of assessment:

-   Practice audit, performed once per quarter

## User research

The work inventory is built from actual user needs. To do this, the team
will conduct user research throughout the project. For this, “user” is
defined broadly and may include anybody who interacts with the system,
including DWD staff and members of the public.

### User research is guided by a research plan

Performance standards:

-   Research plan covers method and purposes of user research

-   Research plan is updated continuously throughout the project

-   Research plan is written in plain language for non-expert readers

-   User research is performed at regular intervals, not just the
    beginning and end of the project

Method of assessment:

-   Manual review of initial research plan at the end of the second
    sprint

-   Manual re-assessment of research plan, performed once per quarter

### Research artifacts are available to all team members

Performance standards:

-   Artifacts are either stored in the code repository or linked to from
    project documentation

-   Discussion of research and development is cross-functional rather
    than siloed by role

Method of assessment:

-   Manual review of artifacts, performed as research tasks are
    completed

## Code and artifacts are available to DWD

The trust needed in a collaborative environment is supported by working
in the open and being transparent. The COR will have administrative
rights to all tools and locations, which may include:

-   Task tracking

-   Custom code

-   Infrastructure-related metrics and data (e.g. uptime, estimated
    costs)

### Tools are accessible by DWD

-   The team’s task work inventory is accessible to DWD staff

-   DWD has administrative rights to any SaaS tools in use by the team

-   Any tools or data in use can be easily transferred to DWD at the end
    of the contract

Method of assessment:

-   Manual review of tools in use, performed once per month

### Code is available and usable by DWD

Performance standards:

-   Custom code is stored in a repository accessible to DWD staff

-   Custom code is licensed for continued use by DWD

Method of assessment:

-   Manual review of repository, performed once per month

[1] Typically, on a 2-week sprint cycle, in accordance with agile
software development.

[2] This is the practice of coordinating the work of development,
> security, and system operations to automate the work that goes into
> testing software and moving it to a live server where people can use
> it — merging software **dev**elopment, **sec**urity testing, and
> system **op**erations. 
